---
layout: page
title: Plausible reasoning and social science methodology
permalink: /dissertation/
---

<p style="color:Gray"> Dissertation chapters or working papers are available upon request prior to publication. </p>

Social and health researchers are increasingly interested in the ways that macro-societal structures can affect human health and shape population distributions of health and well-being. Among health researchers, this interest in social structures has led to debates over whether the current 'causal inference' paradigm, which draws from the clinical trial setting and empiricist philosophy, is able to provide a fruitful methodology for the study of health inequalities. Meanwhile, a number of quantitative researchers in human geography advocate for the adoption of those same empiricist 'causal inference' methods. My dissertation research was motivated by the need for new frameworks that can promote rigorous and insightful research on social structures, health, and geography.

To that end, the dissertation brings critical realist theories of social science into conversation with plausible reasoning (PR) or 'probability as logic', an epistemology that developed mainly within physics and mathematics. Whereas realist theories of science offer a general causal ontology that can make sense of social structures, questions of epistemology have been neglected. I argue that realists need to develop epistemological principles that can be stated independently of their core ontological claims. A similar position was previously articulated by Harold Jeffreys, a twentieth-century theorist of probability and proponent of what he called (perhaps as early as 1939) `critical realism'. The tradition of PR developed by Jeffreys, George P\'olya, and others provides a powerful theory of evidence and the dissertation argues that it can be deployed heuristically to support the development of non-experimental study designs, to assess and debate findings, and to enable incremental insight into generative structures. The dissertation develops these ideas as a contribution to social science methodology.

The main case study of the dissertation applies principles of PR to structure an explanatory investigation into the evolution of the colorectal cancer (CRC) burden in the Dallas-Fort Worth and Houston metropolitan regions. The initial motivation for the study was a persistent and substantial black-white CRC inequality. A growing literature in social epidemiology and health geography, drawing from the influential 'neighborhood effects' paradigm in urban sociology, now argues that residential segregation is a, if not the, driving cause of such cancer disparities (a 'segregation hypothesis'). The neighborhood effects paradigm engenders a particular theoretical perspective on the relationship between social structures and social space, one which calls attention explicitly to 'micro-structures' like schools, peer networks, and also harmful environmental exposures. Relational theories of space, as developed by geographers like Doreen Massey, present an alternative perspective which draws attention to the way that places are constituted by their positions within dynamic social structures. The neighborhood effects paradigm has been criticized for focusing on poor neighborhoods while abstracting away from the political-economic structures that *produce* poverty and uneven geographies, but such critiques have had limited influence in the health literature thus far. 

This case study employs principles of PR to formulate a series of research questions that stress-test the segregation hypothesis with respect to CRC in urban Texas. The research involves three inter-connected components: description of the expansive and polarizing urbanization processes reshaping these regions and their neighborhoods, a multivariate disease mapping analysis, and a test of the conjecture that the vast majority of the black-white racial disparity is accounted for by the excess disease burden inside historically ghettoized African-American neighborhoods. The findings describe ongoing transformations of the CRC burden, including the emergence of class-related spatial CRC inequality in the study areas and the spatial diffusion of CRC inequalities beyond historically segregated urban zones. The study highlights important limitations of the neighborhood effects paradigm for explanation in health geography---particularly with respect to urbanization processes and their consequences for disease burdens---and argues that PR can help support geographical research about macro-societal structures. 

<p style="color:Gray">Connor Donegan. Plausible Reasoning and Heuristic Methodology in Human Geography: An Investigation of Colorectal Cancer Incidence and Inequalities in Urban Texas, 1999-2019. Doctoral dissertation, The University of Texas at Dallas. Dallas, Texas, 2023. </p>
<object data="../assets/Abstract.pdf" width="900" height="650" type='application/pdf'></object>

